add new performance doc in new "explanations" directory (#1239)
Napari/napari: docs/explanations/performance.md

# Napari Performance

Performance is a core feature of napari. Performance is a concern for every
feature that napari implements. Without adequate performance users will migrate

> to other visualization tools, even if napari has impressive functionality.

Reviewer: I would frame this a bit differently. napari has been successful so far because it solves use cases that nobody had adequately solved in Python, even if some of its design is failing to scale so far. So here I would mention more intrinsic characteristics of performance as it relates to visualisation:

- Fundamental use cases such as data exploration depend on performance, because one needs to be able to swiftly find interesting parts of the data. If things are slow, one drowns in noise.
- With visualisation and UI in particular, and in contrast to analysis code, fast, responsive software is joyful to use, while slowdowns are frustrating and makes one want to seek alternatives or simply stop using visualisation altogether, opting instead for summary statistics. This results in loss of information and missed opportunities.

Author: That intro wasn't in my original doc. I just tacked it on. Your suggestions were good I revised it to try and capture the idea that performance for "interactive" tools even super criticial.

There are two main types of performance:

**Objective Performance**
* How long operations take when timed with a stopwatch.
* Most times will vary based on the data being viewed.

**Subjective Performance**
* The user’s experience as it relates to performance.
* Is the user’s experience pleasant or frustrating? Does napari "seem fast"?

Both types of performance are important. No amount of slickness can make up for
an application that is fundamentally too slow. And even a relatively fast
application can feel clunky or frustrating if not designed well.

## Objective Performance

How to keep napari objectively fast:

**Focus On Real Use Cases**

* Focus on cases that matter to lots of people.
* It’s easy to waste time optimizing things no one cares about or no one will
  notice.

> * If a dataset is unreasonable or out of scope or fringe, don’t waste time
>   trying to make it run fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If a dataset is unreasonable or out of scope or fringe, don’t spend too
  many resources trying to make it run fast.
```
Almost every dataset matters to *someone.* =)

**Always Be Timing**

> * Build timers into the software that always run.

Reviewer: Love this.

* If not always visible, power users and developers should be able to toggle them on.
* This gives people an ambient awareness of how long things take.
* Allows users to report concrete performance numbers:

>   *  *it seemed slow* &#8594; *it ran at 10Hz*.
>   *  *it took a long time* &#8594; *it took 2 minutes and 30 seconds*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *  *it seemed slow* → *it ran at 10Hz*.
  *  *it took a long time* → *it took 2 minutes and 30 seconds*.
```

> * Teaches users how different hardware impacts performance.

Reviewer: I was surprised to find out the other day that random seek times are two orders of magnitude faster on SSDs vs HDDs. Obviously I knew it was faster but I didn't know it was 100x faster!

The context was testing performance on a dataset on a laptop's SSD, where 121 1MB chunks worked almost equally fast as 1 121MB chunk. But when we applied it to the full data on an external HDD, the performance was unusable!

Reviewer: It might be worth noting this fact here as an example.

Author: I added a line about HDD vs. SSD vs. network file systems.

Yes SSD seek times are so radically different there are algorithms today people run using SSD that aren't sped up versions of HDD algorithms, they are seek-intensive things that never would have been attempted on HDD. So it has opened some doors for having huge datastructures on disk that "hop around in" all over the place.

On the flip side if you do run one of those on HDD will performance so horrendously bad it will seem just broken and unusable.

It's also interesting the most common block storage for AWS system EBS is SSD based, but it's networked! You'd think if it's networked what does it matter if it's SSD or not, but you want/need the fast seek times even over the network.

**Performance System Tests**
* Create automatic tests that time specific operations in specific known datasets.
* Time many different operations on a nice selection of different datasets.

**Performance Unit Tests**
* Time one small operation to monitor for regressions.
* Napari has some of these today as "benchmarks".
* Interesting to see how different hardware performs as time goes on.

**Run All Tests Every Merge**
* Save results to a database or somewhere.
* Catch a regression right when it happens and not weeks or
  months later.

> * See how new features run on large datasets no one tested.

Reviewer: These are great! Setting up continuous ASV testing would be wonderful.

Author: I added mention of ASV. In general the document is pretty aspirational without many concrete plans. Talking with @sofroniewn we kind of felt the order here is:
1. Write this grand performance vision document.
1. Put it aside and dive into obvious big problems like #845 and #204 
1. Come up for air after things are better and survey the performance landscape and prioritize what to do, including automated tests, timing, benchmarking, etc.
1. At that point maybe this doc can point to lots of things we are actually doing to support these goals.

The point being #845 is so glaring it's worth tackling first.
